well the US says a Navy Logistics vessel
has set sail for the Eastern
Mediterranean to establish a temporary
pier in Gaza to deliver aid but it's
expected to take at least two months for
the peer to become operational and it
isn't yet clear how the aid will be
distributed Aid groups say the move by
US President Joe Biden sidesteps the
core issue the need to allow in large
numbers of trucks through existing
Crossings well let's speak to me Statler
about this she joins us from Melbourne
in Australia is the CEO of ground truth
solutions they help people affected by
crisis shape how humanitarian Aid is
implemented thank you so much make for
being with us on Al jazer so what are
your thoughts first about this temporary
peer that the Americans want to set up
is this an efficient effective way of
bringing in Aid to
Gaza I mean the short answer to that is
no but I think the first question we
have to ask ourselves is how have we
gotten to this point you know
humanitarian agencies have been warning
for month mons that all signs were
pointing to an absolutely critical
humanitarian situation in Gaza if a
lasting ceasefire didn't come if
humanitarian law wasn't respected inside
Gaza and if land borders weren't opened
up for unrestricted Aid access so of
course none of that is happened um we
did some research with people living in
Gaza over two months ago now that showed
a population in absolutely desperate
need of food and water I think at that
time 90% of those we spoke to 97% even
were rationing food to survive skipping
meals um and drinking dirty water I
think if you start with some you know
some basic truths land access is
possible now today the land borders are
not closed by some natural force Like An
Earthquake as we see in other places
they're being blocked by humans um and
they need to be opened up again and what
is going to save lives now is a
ceasefire combined with unimpeded access
for humanitarian workers yeah you can
sort of see from a humanitarian
imperative standpoint you know why
people would go to the extreme lengths
that they're now going to to try to get
Aid to Gaza but how long does it take to
build a sea port I mean people are
starving to death now and when people
reach this level of hunger they have
hours in which an intervention might
help them they don't have weeks yeah um
and so I think we're sort of skirting
around the real problem which is the
land access which is going to be much
more Ive yeah land access in all eight
organizations agree that this is the
most efficient way and the most urgent
uh way that aid needs to get into Gaza
right now but at the same time you have
you know different countries the US EU
commission also hoping that an aid route
from Cypress to Gaza will open on Sunday
that ships will be able to depart from
lanica in Cypress to Gaza do you do you
feel like the international um Community
is putting enough effort in delivering
Aid to Gaza in an organized way it seems
that every country is trying to do their
own thing
here I think from what I've seen you
know I'm not in Gaza but the attempts
that we've seen from particularly you
know the United Nations to coordinate
the aid that is going in um people are
really doing what they can I think there
has been obviously the geopolitical
tensions have potentially caused some
delays in some Aid decisions that could
have happened a little bit faster um you
know we've seen the The Cutting of
funding to onra and then the reversal of
those cuts um a lot of people just
really scrambling to work out what they
can do what is possible um I think at
the moment when it comes to humanitarian
assistance there seems to be people
trying to come together to do the right
thing I'm not sure from an advocacy
standpoint that people are pushing hard
enough for this lasting ceasefire that
is needed um as well as pushing hard
enough for this unimpeded humanitarian
access because those two things together
at this point given how critical the
situation is are really the only things
that are going to make a difference yeah
you told us about the the assessment you
were able to to have on Gaza about two
months ago and the situation on the
ground there how difficult is it today
to organize an aid operation on a large
scale in Gaza given the immense needs
that are on the
ground it's incredibly difficult I think
there's a lot of real dedicated
humanitarians who are trying their best
um first of all there's a problem just
of amounts so the only entry points to
Gaza currently allowed are in the South
there's not enough aid for people in the
South as it is um but to get Aid to the
north where people are really suffering
convoys have to travel you know through
these smashed up roads there's Rubble
everywhere they're under constant threat
of attack um even just looting I mean
this is a desperate population now now
and many convoys have been looted as
well as being blocked or delayed um
people who are trying to access Aid are
being fired upon as we saw last week um
so you know the conditions are really
really challenging there are certainly
from our research we found a lot of
community groups who were doing their
best to try to collect Assistance or
food that was available make sure that
it was redistributed amongst different
communities so that those in the most
need were able to get it um but being
realistic you know that was a couple of
months ago and the situation has just
descended since then um it's absolutely
hideous and so I think you know as I
said before what really needs to happen
is a lasting ceasefire not a temporary
pause in
hostilities um and the need to adhere to
International humanitarian law because
currently conditions for Aid workers are
just too dangerous for them to be able
to do what they need to do let alone for
the people who are trying to access this
life-saving assistance thank you for
talking to us Meg thank you very much
for your time Meg Satler joining us
there from Melbourne
Australia thank you so much